ok so now we're going to start talking
about some classic parsing methods for
natural language processing some of
those techniques are also used for
parsing non-human languages for example
programming languages that's why they
have been developed many years ago some
of them are in the 50s and 60s I should
say that even though those methods are
pretty old they are still being used
with some modifications as you can
expect even these days so it's important
to understand how they work and where
the people who came up with them were
coming home so again let's look at the
most typical example of parsing we have
on the left-hand side now a parse tree
for the sentence the child ate the cake
with a fork on the right hand side we
have a grammar so the question is how do
we arrive at this parse tree given the
grammar and given the original sentence
as a string so one of the approaches is
to treat parsing as a search problem and
there are two types of constraints some
of those constraints come from the input
sentence so we know that it has a
certain number of words that they come
in a certain order and that they have
certain parts of speech and there are
other constraints that come from the
grammar so we know that what we're
looking for is a sentence or a noun
phrase and that the sentence has a noun
phrase and a verb phrase in that order
and that we expect to see an adjective
before the noun and so those types of
constraints both of them help constrain
the parse process so there are two
general approaches to parsing and search
one is a top-down method where you start
from the sentence level and you tried to
expand and interior each a tree
structure that matches the input string
or you can also have the so-called
bottom-up method where you start from
the sentence itself and you try to
combine adjacent words into constituents
and then combine those constituents
together and till you reach the s level
at the top so here's a vey simple
example of top-down parsing on the right
hand side we have our say the same
grammar then we're starting from s and
we're trying to come up with the parse
for the sentence so for the first thing
we can try is s golf glenn PvP that's
kind of an ambiguous in this example
then the noun phrase the one thing that
we can try again not necessarily buy
less more
derivation just for some reason we want
to choose this particular expansion NP
goes to NP P P
and then it turns out that eventually
this is going to conflict with the input
sentence which is that the first two
words are at the child so the
prepositional phrase is nowhere to be
found near the beginning of the sentence
and therefore we have to backtrack and
consider a different interpretation for
noun phrase specifically determining a
noun and later if we expand this further
down to the sentence this particular
derivation is going to match the input
sentence and we can proceed with the
right-hand side of the grammar until we
finish parsing the entire sentence so
this is a an example of top-down parsing
and it was successful in this case with
a little bit of backtrack now let's look
at bottom-up parsing and bottom-up
parsing we're going to start from the
sentence their child ate their cake with
the fork and we're going to try to
combine symbols starting from the left
hand side so there is the only thing
that it can be as a determiner child is
a noun and so on we get all the parts of
speech and we move on we tried now to
combine left to right the determiner
with something else to build a new non
terminal from the grammar so the
terminal noun combine very nicely into a
noun phrase then we have an our noun
phrase and a verb phrase we could
combine those two together or we can
combine another determiner in and down
into a noun phrase and possibly a third
one then we can combine the
prepositional phrase with the noun
phrase I'm sorry the preposition with
the noun phrase to form a prepositional
phrase and now we can combine a noun
phrase with a prepositional phrase to
form a new noun phrase and so on as you
can see at every iteration we are
picking two symbols that have not been
combined yet and we combined them
together until we reach the top level of
the sentence s now when I say to this is
just because this grammar is of the
so-called binarized form in which case
the right hand side of a non-terminal is
always always consists of two new non
terminals this is not necessarily the
case in general as if you remember the
grammar with auxiliaries had rules of
the kind s goes to auxiliary
non ferrous verb phrase in which case
have three things on the right-hand side
it resulted for parsing it's very
important whether grandma is binarized
or not we visit this in the next few
slides so there are some advantages in
both the bottom up and the top down
methods and there are just as many
disadvantages for each of them so for
example the bottom up parser or has a
significant point means that it explores
options that are not going to lead to a
full parks and this is pretty obvious as
we're starting from the sentences and
the top-down method has a different
problem it explores options that don't
match the full sentence so you may have
a dead end starting from the top and
then you have to do a lot of
backtracking until you find the correct
expansion so one technique that solves
some of those pollens is based on
dynamic programming so just to remind
you dynamic programming is a method
where you have a number of iterations at
each iteration you combine some
solutions some partial solutions that
you have computed in the previous
iterations to form a solution to larger
problem so you essentially cache a lot
of intermediate results for example the
particular parts of a noun phrase so
that you don't have to heap parse it
later on so the technical term for this
caching is memoization
not to be confused with memorization
memorization just means that once you
have a non-terminal that has already
been parsed you can just store all the
information that was needed to parse it
and you can just restore it from memory
instead of recomputing it every time you
need it so the method that has been used
the longest that uses dynamic
programming for parsing is the so-called
kaki Kisame Younger parser or CKY as I
mentioned before it's based on dynamic
programming and it's actually very
powerful as long as the grammar is in a
binarize form so now we're going to look
at some specific techniques for parsing
we're going to start with shift reduce
parsing so shift reduce parsing is a
bottom up parser it goes left to right
in the sentence and it
to match the right hand side of a
production and - it can build the
sentence
it includes two operations as the name
indicates those are the shift operation
and the reduce operation the shift
operation takes a word from the input
sentence and pushes it onto a stack so
for example the sentence is the child
ate the cake with a fork the first thing
that we'll see is that the word there is
going to be pushed onto the stack and
then it will wait until it can be
combined with some other words and then
if that happens we'll perform the so
called the reduce operation which checks
if the top-end words on the top of the
stack matched the right hand side of a
production if they do then all of them
are popped from the stack and then
replaced by the left hand side of the
production for example if we have the
word duh or read you're on the stack and
the next word is child the word there is
a determiner the word child is a noun
and we have a rule that says that a
determiner and a noun can be combined to
form a noun phrase so once we have
pushed the and child to the top of the
stack and we pop them back we're going
to replace them with the symbol for noun
phrase and there's a stopping condition
this one should be pretty obvious this
method is going to stop if both of those
things are true namely that the input
sentence has been processed all the way
to the end and that an S has been popped
from the stack and there's nothing left
in the stack so let me now walk you
through an example of a shift reduce
parsing process what you see on the
screen is the sentence that we want to
parse the child ate the cake there is a
star that tells us how far in the string
we are we have gone at the beginning
obviously we at the beginning of the
string so the only thing that we can do
at this point is to recognize that the
word duh is a word and that it has to be
pushed into the stack using a shift
operation so we're moving the cursor
forward and we now have the word there
on top of the stack and we replace it
there with a determiner so determiner is
it's part of speech so this is done
using a reduced operation so now at this
point the stack has determiner on top
and child ate the cake remains in the
string so the next thing that we want to
do here is to process the word child so
the word child gets pushed onto the
stack and then replaced with a noun so
with the shifting of induce operation we
have the terminal now on top of the
stack and ate the cake as a remainder of
the string so this point we can perform
a secondary Deus operation to merge the
determiner in the noun and replace them
with a noun phase the next thing we do
is look at the word eight the word eight
goes to the stack then it gets replaced
with it's part of speech which is verb
and then the noun phrase and the verb
are going to be combined together and so
on so we have a sequence of shifts and
reduce operations until we get to this
point where we have on the stack three
word a three categories noun phrase verb
and determiner and the word cake so the
word cake gets replaced by a noun and
then at this point we can combine things
on the top of the stack determiner down
into noun phrase verb noun phrase into a
verb phrase and finally noun phrase verb
phrase into an S so at this point we
have satisfied all the stopping
conditions when we can declare that the
parsing was successful so just to remind
you the stopping conditions were that
the stack is empty the input string is
empty and that we have been able to get
s as part of the process and the
corresponding parse tree here is s is
goes to noun phrase verb phrase and so
on so the next thing that we are going
to talk about is the coca kisame younger
parsing method or CKY it's based on
dynamic programming and the reason why
we're using dynamic programming is so
that a lot of the work that is normally
repeated in parsing bottom-up or
top-down parsing it doesn't have to be
repeated so we're going to cache some of
the intermediate results in order to
improve the complexity of the parsing
algorithm so the dynamic programming
method works the following way you are
going to build the parts for a substring
from word I toward J based on all the
current parsers I to K and K - J where
kay somewhere between I and J so for
example if we have something like the
child ate the cake
we're going to parse that phrase the
child ate the cake based on the parcels
for the child in the parse for aid the
cake or any other combination of
sub-strings for this five word sequence
so the complexity of dynamic programming
is cubic and this is for cognizing or
finding a single parks for any input
string of length and we're going to look
at more detail at the complexity of CKY
in a few slides
so the CKY methods is a bottom-up method
and it requires that the grammar is
normalized more specifically has to be
converted to a binary form so in the
binary grammar the only thing that you
are allowed to have is a non-terminal
going to two non terminals or a non
terminal going to a terminal later we're
also going to look at the early parser
which is also based on dynamic
programming which is a top-down parser
and a little bit more complicated than
CKY but more importantly doesn't have
this binarization requirement so going
back to CKY the sender's that you want
to parse is the same the child ate the
cake with a fork the grammar is the same
and as you can see it is in binary form
let's confirm this s goes to an PvP
there too long terminals this is fine
both rules for noun phrases include two
non terminals on the right hand side so
this is fine the same thing applies for
prepositional phrases and verb phrases
and then finally we have the lexicon all
the non terminals here the terminal
number position involved turn into
single terminals and again this is
completely consistent with the
definition of a binary cracker
so the CKY method works by building a
dynamic table each of those cells here
tells you how to parse a substring of
the original sentence from a given word
to another given word so for example at
the very beginning we want to build a
parse for the word da so the word though
looking at the lexicon is a determiner
so this cell here includes
information that the word days a
determiner then we're going to start
filling this table until we get all the
boxes full and the order in which this
is done is by columns going bottom up so
the next thing that we're going to
produce after this determiner is the box
just between child and eight so the word
child is a noun
according to the lexicon the next box is
the one above so is there any way to
combine the determiner and a noun yes
there is such a way and that is by
creating a row for noun phrases and we
can also keep some back pointers that
tell us that this noun phrase was
created from the determiner in the now
so the next box that needs to be
expanded is the one to the right of the
word eight well that's a verb there's
only one possible way to interpret this
word in the grammar then there's nothing
else that we can do that column we move
on to the next column the word there is
a determiner and again that the box is
above cannot be filled at this point
because there's no rule that has a
determiner as there at hand side the
word cake now is a noun at this point we
can combine the determiner further with
the noun for cake that gives us a noun
phrase in this particular cell here
which with back pointers takes us to the
parses of the individual constituents
determiner and now then we continue
filling the rest of this column going up
so there is a verb phrase that can be
produced by combining the verb ate with
the noun phrase the cake so this is what
you see on the screen now and we can
also go all the way up to the sow that
goes from there to cake in this case we
can build a sentence right there and
this sentence consists of the noun
phrase their child and the verb phrase
ate the cake
now one thing that you can say at this
point is okay and we're done
we just parse the input sentence
obviously we're not done because we
still have the words with the fork that
have to be processed we have been able
to identify a sentence up to this point
the child ate the cake but we're not
done we have to continue until we can
find an S in the top right-hand bar
of the chart okay so what do we need to
do next we need to expand the word with
that's a preposition there's nothing we
can do with this preposition on the
right hand side so the rest of the boxes
in this column are going to remain blank
the next word then is the word der then
fork then we can combine the determiner
for der with the noun for fork to get a
noun phrase we can combine that noun
phrase with the prepositional phrase
with ribs or with the preposition way to
form a prepositional phrase and finally
we can combine the noun phrase the cake
with the prepositional phrase with the
fork to form a noun phrase that
corresponds to the substring the cake
with the fork so this is where we are
now we can continue going up
we now have an entire verb phrase that
we obtain by combining the verb phrase
ate the cake with a prepositional phrase
with the fork and that gives us a new
verb phrase ate the cake with the fork
but you can also combine a verb phrase
at this point by merging ate which is a
verb with the noun phrase the cake with
the fork so you can see that we have a
verb phrase in the cell but it can be
obtained in two different ways and this
obviously will lead us to having two
alternative parses for this sentence and
eventually we have this verb phrase can
be combined by with the noun phrase the
child to form the sentence the child ate
the cake with a fork but as we notice
before there are two different parses
that have to do with the verb phrase ate
the cake with a fork so if you look at
the CKY data structure you will see that
the two bold lines tell you that the
verb phrase in position 8 can be
obtained by either combining of the verb
and the noun phrase or by combining a
verb phrase and a prepositional phrase
so this gives us two different parses
and we want to figure out what is the
meaning of each of those to send us is
the one on the left and the one on the
right so what's the difference between
the two let's look at the syntactic tree
the one on the left hand side has the
prepositional phrase with the fork as
part of the cake with the fork so
it's part of the noun phrase whereas the
one on the right hand side has with the
fork at the same level as eight so to
remind you we have looked at examples
like this before the one on the left
hand side is an example of
non-attachment or low attachment and the
one on the right hand side is an example
of a high attachment also known as verb
attachment and the semantics of the
sentence on the left is that the cake
includes a fork whereas the one on the
right hand side says that the fork was
used to eat the cake
and this is the penn treebank a
presentation of those sentences as you
can see the first one has s goes to NP
VP and the VP goes to V PPP whereas the
second one des goes to n P VP just as
before but the verb phrase goes to V and
P and then the PP is generated as part
of the noun phrase instead of as to act
as part of the verb phrase if you
interested is a nice online demo of CKY
parser which actually uses this very
simple example to the one that we looked
at so far feel free to take a look at
this site and return here so one thing
that we want to say about the complexity
of CKY is that there are over n square
cells in the table specifically there
are n times n plus 1/2 cells but it is
still order of N squared for finding a
single parts you have to do a linear
look up to each cell so that's a square
algorithm and then you have to do this
end time so the total time complexity is
or Bank cubed however if you want to
find all the parses the total time
complexity is going to be exponential
not not cubic and there is a reason for
that and we'll get to that in a second
now let's look at a longer example so
this grammar here which we've seen
before has non-binary holes for example
it has the possibility of creating
imperative sentences will be going
directly to a V auxiliaries now before
the noun phrase is and so on so if you
want to parse the sentence take this
book which is an imperative sentence
we have to use the grammar that we have
on the slide and because it's not
binarize we cannot use CKY as it is we
have to first convert the grammar to a
binarize format so here some of the
non-binary productions s goes to
auxiliary noun phrase verb phrase this
is non-binary as because it has three
and non terminals on the right hand side
s goes to VP and B goes to pronoun and
so on are all unary rules which have to
be converted to binary as well so this
leads us to the binarized form of this
grammar the technical term for it is a
Chomsky normal form or CNF it tells us
that the grammar has to be in the
following form either a non-terminal
going to two long terminals or a
non-terminal going to a terminal so to
convert the grammar from the previous
slide we have to create new non
terminals for hybrid roles so habita is
one that has a mixture of terminals and
non terminals on the right hand side for
NRI rules where n is other than two and
for univeral where n is equal to one so
here's an example from the 80s grammar
described in giraffes Gilmartin the
original grammar is shown on the Left we
have two examples of non-binary
productions s goes to auxiliary noun
phrase verb phrase and s goes to verb
phrase so how do we convert those to
binary form well one possibility is to
split the three-way right hand side of
auxiliary interface verb phrase into two
binary roles by introducing a new non
terminal called x1 so we have s goes to
x1 VP and X 1 goes to auxiliary and P so
this way the new grammar is in CNF now
the unary cases are more complicated and
they involve a specific procedure which
is going to take possibly some of the
terminal symbols so that the grammar can
be turned into context into a Chomsky
normal form so in this case s goes to VP
in the original grammar is going to be
replaced by several new rules some of
which directly take you to the terminals
such as s goes to book in truth and
prefer and others that expand the
Sanders s in
- - non-terminals each of which having
exactly two non terminals so s goes to
verb a noun phrase and s goes to V PPP
and you can do the same thing for the
other production so for example and P
goes to pronoun is going to be replaced
directly with NP goes to I or he or she
or me NP goes to proper noun is going to
be replaced directly with the terminals
and P goes to either Houston or not
North Western Airlines Northwest
Airlines and so on so there is an
automated procedure that takes the
original grammar and binarize as it and
turns it into Chomsky normal form so
here's some specific examples an
infinite type of verb phrase that is -
verb phrase would become something like
infinite type of verb phrase followed by
- as the prepositions non-terminal
symbol and then that new non terminal
symbol is going to be converted into the
terminal symbol - s goes to auxiliary
noun phrase verb phrase it's gotta be
replaced with s goes to R 1 or X 1 V P R
1 goes to auxiliary noun phrase and
finally all the unary rules will be
converted into rules where the left hand
side is a non-terminal and the right
hand side is a terminal so there's some
issues with CKY as when we start from a
non-binary grammar it turns out that the
language generated by that new grammar
is only weakly equivalent to the
original language it generates the same
strings using the different derivations
so if we have to convert the original
grammar to Chomsky normal form then the
final parse tree is not going to match
the original grammar so some additional
processing will need to be done to
convert it and this is something
relatively straightforward to do but it
needs to be done well not a issue with
CKY parsing is that you can have
syntactic ambiguities so the
deterministic CKY method has no way to
perform syntactic disambiguation so in
the sentence the Charlie the cake with
the fork we saw that the chart includes
two possible parses but the parser
has no way to tell which one is the best
one it will need to use either
probabilities or some additional
external information to choose one over
the other and we'll see how this can be
done later on okay so as you can see CKY
is a very reasonable parser however it
has some issues that can be addressed
using some other techniques we're going
to look at some of those other
techniques in the next segment